Grant Kell on the, I'm chairing of this subcommittee today.
Uh, we've got fifteen minutes of your time. We have your submission.
Please take it as read, but feel free to highlight a few of the key points, and
we'd love a few ques- opportunity for some questions.
So the floor is yours.
Yeah. So, good morning, everybody, and thank you for the,
opportunity to speak to you in person today, on the
Natural, Environment and Planning Bills.
Uh, Warima, chair of Waikato Regional Council. So good morning.
Um, so the Waikato Regional Council overall supports the intention to
replace the RMA and to simplify the resource management
system. Uh, but it's something we need to get right.
So we need to have resource management legislation that is clear,
workable, and will withstand election cycles.
So that is a key for us. Um, I won't go over what you've probably heard from
others, but just want to focus in on what's important for the Waikato
region. Um, so Waikato region, we are twenty percent of the
land area of the North Island. Ten percent approximately of New
Zealand's, population live and work in our
region. We are ten percent approximately of the New Zealand
GDP, which makes us the fourth largest
economically producing region. Uh, we have fifteen
percent of the country's councils.
Uh, so that's twelve local government entities, either in the, the region
completely or a part of. Um, big part of our
region is our renewable energy resources.
Uh, the majority of Taupō's volcanic geothermal area
is, is in our region, as well as items like the Lake
Taupō, Waikato River, Hauraki Plains, significant
wetlands, coastal areas, including the Firth of Thames and Coromandel, which are
obviously part of the Hauraki Gulf Park.
Uh, we have forty iwi and, a hundred and eighty hapū in
our region. So we have fifteen years of co-governance, co-management with our
river iwi. Excuse me.
Uh, and it's a place that we are comfortable in, and we're national leaders in this
field. So we wish to see those deep relationships and foundation of
trust that we have built with iwi,
and have been the cornerstone of previous resource management system,
to go forward and actually strengthen in this new
system. We acknowledge that our sys- our, submission
is lengthy, and we hope that it has been viewed constructively.
So the main themes of our submissions are highlighted on paragraph
eight on pages two and three, and they're also further
elaborated on pages four through to fourteen with
accompanying detail. Uh, we have a couple of key matters that we would like
to draw to the subcommittee's attention.
Um, and one for me before I pass over to Chris McClay, our CE, is
drawing on my recent experiences sitting as a commissioner on our coastal
plan hearing. Uh, having the likes of Aquaculture New Zealand, seafood
industry, Royal Forest and Bird, and New Zealand Sports Fishing Council being
able to participate, in the process has added immense
value to that process. Our submission on paragraph
sixty-one and submission point one zero four asks that the
restriction to qualifying residents, is
kept in the consent process,
but removed from plan making, and that enables those sector
and interest groups to participate in that plan making
process. Uh, I'll now hand over to Chris, with some more key
matters for us. Thank you.
Yeah. Uh, thank you through the chair, Grant and, and committee members for this
opportunity. I've got two specialists with me, Tracy May and
Mark Brocklesby, in case there's any questions o-of a technical
nature. I'm gonna focus on four matters which are of
importance to the Waikato. Um, the first of these is the proposed
permitted activity system. I'd refer to paragraph sixty-five on page
thirteen of our submission, submission point seventy-six on page
eighteen, and submission point one forty-four on page
forty-eight. We do see some fish hooks in the new permitted
activity system that will make things prac-- challenging from a
practical point of view, particularly if we're trying to reduce
red tape. The provisions in effect make a pseudo consent process in our
mind that adds a lot of impost to what should be a simple
system. Presently drafted, the proposed permitted activity
system strongly resembles a consent process with registration
and monitoring requirements. Our council has had one of the most
permissive regional plans in operation in the country for the last twenty years or
so. We have focused on proactive monitoring of
high-risk activities rather than monitoring all activities
or requiring all activities to register.
Our suggested amendments allow for more discretion,
hoping to make things simpler to manage activities without additional
system cost to both authorities and
landowners. In other words, we think our amendment-- our, our
suggestions would make things simpler, faster, and cheaper
than, than is in the legislation.
The next matter I'd like to raise is to do with, Te Tiriti o Waitanga
or Te Awa o Waikato, which is more commonly known as the vision and
strategy for the Waikato and Waipā rivers, and
specifically the equivalent effect, that is,
introduced into the legislation.
I referred in our submission to paragraph E on page
four, paragraph twenty-eight on page
nine, submi-submission point eighty-three on page
twenty, submission point one zero two on page twenty-nine, and submission
point one seventy-one on page sixty-four.
Simply, Te Tiriti o Waitanga, the vision and strategy, is the
primary direction-setting document for the Waikato River and activities
within its catchment. Under iwi river settlement
legislation, where there's inconsistency
between Te Tiriti o Waitanga and any national direction, then
Te Tiriti o Waitanga prevails. Now, this is absolutely central to
understandUnder the Treaty Settlement legislation, if there's an
inconsistency between Te Tiriti o Waitangi and any proposed national
or any national direction, then Te Tiriti o Waitangi prevails.
It was inserted directly into our-- into the Waikato Regional Policy
Statement, by the government without the requirement to
progress through a Schedule One plan change process.
So it's imperative that the new legislation is crystal clear
how the existing Treaty settlement obligations in relation to Te Tiriti
o Waitangi will be met. Clause nine,
subclause one of the Natural Environment Bill references the equivalent
effect where the Crown will work with post-settlement
governance entities to seek agreement on how Treaty settlement
redress will operate with equivalency.
We recommend including recognition of Te Tiriti o Waitangi in
both bills to ensure its status is upheld in the new resource
management system, and we seek that Te Tiriti o Waitangi
is deemed to be part of the Regional Spatial Plan, the Natural
Environment Plan, and also the land use plans for the Waikato
region.
The next point I'd like to raise is to do with the Lake Taupō nutrient
management framework. This is referred to on page eleven--
sorry, paragraph eleven, page seven, submission, submission
point one sixty-seven on page sixty-two, and submission
point one sixty-nine on page
sixty-four. Taxpayers and
ratepayers have invested eighty-one billion dollars of public money
to improve water quality in the Lake Taupō catchment.
In addition, local government
and landowners have incurred significant additional
costs. The nitrogen cap and trade system
that was introduced was the first of its kind in the
world. It has successfully resulted in a
reduction of nitrogen entering the lake by purchasing at least twenty
percent of the nitrogen that was put onto land, or around a hundred and seventy
tons per, per hectare that was lost into the lake system.
And that was done using the eighty-one billion dollars of public money.
Simply, we cannot risk having this approach undone
inadvertently by the new system
or a transition to the new system. Careful consideration of the
implications of the bills on this existing nutrient capping planning framework is
needed, including ensuring that nationally prescribed approaches do not
undermine or limit the ability to continue to operate
established local catchment-specific
arrangements. Well-defined environment
limits exist for the catchment, and that are maintained through the use of these
innovative economic instruments, exactly what the system reform
is seeking to champion. So we ask that the new system
provides a mechanism for the current provisions to effectively be
lifted and shifted easily into the new legislation and
given effect to in the Natural Environment
Plan. The final point I'd like to
raise is of a more technical matter, and it's
to do with clauses thirty-two and one sixty-four of the
Natural Environment Bill or section seventy and one oh
seven, which are in the Resource Management Act, which have been taken over into
those new clauses. This relates to matters that have been brought to
our attention through the recent Environment Court process for a
significant plan change for the Waikato for land use.
That is Plan Change One. The court paused
making a decision while the Resource Management Act
recently was amended.
So to do with clause thirty-two or section seventy, and it relates to
submission point one forty-one on page forty-six of our submission.
So recently, the government amended the Resource Management Act at our
request to enable permitted activities under section
seventy. That is where some environmental
limits, cannot be met. This was
essential for the Environment Court to consider the validity of giving
permitted activity status for some low-risk farming activities
in Plan Change One. Without that
change, an additional two thousand eight hundred farmers would need
resource consent, probably for little benefit if
any.
Our submission simply recommends that clause thirty-two, the
principles for classifying activities of the Natural Environment
Bill, which is equivalent to section seventy of the RMA, should
reflect the amendments that were made to the section via the Consenting and
Other System Changes Amendment Act in August of last
year. Curiously, presently they do
not. As drafted, clause thirty-two
reverts back to the previous version of section seventy of the RMA.
This means that councils would require resource consents, from
landowners for activities where there's an environment, environmental
limit already being breached. Um, and that would be for either
permit-permitted activities or consents.
So if left as drafted, rules requiring some consents
or permits, I should say, in the new system, would need to be written for farming
activities that are presently permitted activities in our regional
plan. Now, looking at the companion
provision for the granting of those permits and consents.
So this is clause one sixty-four of the new bill or section one
oh seven of the current RMA, and it's referred to in submission point
two ten, on page
seventy-nine. While we support clause one
sixty-four, matters for which permit must not be
granted, we, we suggest that this clause should also
consider that where there's already a breach of a limit, the consenting authority
does have the ability to make a decision on an
application.Currently, Clause 164 states that
where an environment limit is breached, the consenting authority is unable to
grant a permit or consent. Our
suggested amendment to Clause 164C on page 79
provides for a consenting or s- a permitting pathway with the
necessary considerations. As stated in our submission
point, we consider that a permitting authority should be able to
grant a permit if another approach similar to RMA Section
1072A is adopted. Our sub- suggested
amendments at submission point 141 on page
46 and submission point 210 on page 79
would address these matters. Uh, finding it's
quite a technical matter, but just in an attempt to, to
simplify the, the conundrum I've just
described, I'll just describe it like this.
As presently written, when an activity is unable to be considered as a
permitted activity, as written in Clause 32, then a
consent's required. But where a consent is required,
one not, cannot be granted
because of the way that Clause 164 is written.
Something doesn't quite add up to us, and we believe it needs to be
corrected. The, it will have a
significant-- this will have a significant impact on activities undertaken in our
region, and as previously mentioned, at least 2,800
low-risk farming activities would need to obtain,
permits, which we cannot grant.
Our amendments seek for this, to, to,
provide a c- a pathway in both instances.
Pathways that allow the options of assessing the current breach of the environment
limit and so that everybody can be satisfied that conditions can be
applied that will contribute to remedying the environment limit breach
over time. Th- th- th-
Pass that to Ryan to finish.
Uh, well, I'm, I'm happy not to wind up right now.
Yeah.
Um, I see Ryan's got his hand up for questions, and I'd rather, I'd rather w-we
got the questions.
Yeah. That'd be great.
So I think that's all right.
Um, and thank you. Very good submission. Thanks. Some great points.
I'll let the, the member of Parliament for the fastest growing city in the country
have a say.
Thank, thanks, Chair. Hey, thanks, team, for your presentation.
And, yeah, obviously a lot of similar themes coming in from all over the
country. Um, couple of quick questions for you guys.
In your submission-
Mm-hmm
... you talk about, data sets and,
you mention significant, gaps in environmental
data are needed to set limits. So I guess my question is what, what data
sets or monitoring capabilities are most lacking, and what would it,
what would it help to sort of fill that for you guys from a,
compliance or a, a council
perspective?
You want that, Christine?
Yeah. Um, thanks, Ryan. I guess for us, the,
some of those data sets are really just consistency of data across the
entire region. One that springs to mind is probably groundwater.
That's an area of, focus or
for gaps, identifying gaps. And also, as you'll be
aware, a third of our region is in fact the coastal marine
area, and, and it's a bit of a poor cousin to,
some of the data that we have on land and freshwater.
Okay. Thanks for that. And one more question if I could, Chair.
Yep, fire away. Last one. Yep.
Um, where'd it go? Oh, just on gaps between the two
bills. You've identified gaps, and you'd like us to
consider effects on wetlands, geothermal features, outstanding natural
landscapes. I understand some of this might come through the policy direction,
in next, next statements, but were there any other conflicting or
gaps you think we need to be aware of between the two bills?
Um, me again, Ryan. Um, I think the, the key is making
sure under the planning bill where we are address, addressing
kind of land use activities, that we are also making sure some of the
environmental limits are taken account of.
Um, and one that springs to mind, particularly with
respect to residential and commercial activity, is freshwater
and that link to water allocation and, water
quantity.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Uh, look, thank you very much. We've reached our, allotted time.
Really appreciate your submission. Very, very helpful.
And, thank you very much. Have a great day.
Well, hey, thanks, Ryan.
Thank you.
And, and more than happy to make any of our staff available to, your
officials, that are advising you in the select committee.
Yeah. The, the technical points you pointed out, they're very helpful.
Thank you very much. Yeah.
Thank you.
All the best.
Okay. Cheers. Right. We should have our
next, Te Topuni
Kokorangi. Are they up next?
Who... Here we go. Is that Sean I see
there?
Hi.
Kia ora. Good morning.
Is it on?
Uh, tena koutou. Um-
Yeah. Good morning. Uh, hi. Good morning.
Uh, Grant McMillan, I'm the chair of the subcommittee.
Uh, we have 15 minutes with you. Um,
we, you take your submission as read, but please feel free to highlight a few
key points, and away we go. Thank you.
Welcome.
Right. E oku rangatira, tena koutou katoa.
Uh, ko Liana Poutu toku ingoa. Ko au te, pou
whakarae, te hiamana me kī o Te Topuni Kokorangi.
Kei konei, toku ringaringa, Sean
Zilches. Uh, e mihi ana ki a koutou tena ata.
Uh, good morning, everybody. My name is Liana Poutu.
Uh, I, along with Sean Zilches, are here presenting on
behalf of Te Kāhui Tupua, which is the legal personality for
Taranaki Maunga and the other peaks.
Uh, the entity that we represent, is Te
Topuni Kokorangi, so I chair that entity.
Um, and also, Sean is our technical
planner for Te Topuni Kokorangi. Uh, as you said, we're not gonna
read through our submission. We will, will highlight a few
things. I guess the, the first thing I want to,
um-Probably kick off with is in our settlement
legislation, Te Türe Whakatupua mo te Kahui
Tupua. Uh, Te Tupane Kookorangi has legal
standing to participate in a range
of, of fora, to represent Te
Kahui Tupua. One of our, our key
concerns, I guess the concern that underlies,
our position on, on these bills is
that we have, legal standing to
participate. Uh, that's-- that is also extended
outside of the boundaries of the national
park. So although the legal personality,
is described as being the legal personality for the
peaks, we also have standing to, operate
in fora where the impacts
are, are greater than, than the ring plane, what we refer to as the ring
plane of, of the national park of Te Papakura o
Taranaki. One of the, the concerns we have
with the bill is the way that Te Kahui Tupua
as a legal personality has been included in the, the broad
definition of,
of Maori land, interested Maori land.
And, and one of the reasons for that is because it doesn't
fully, prescribe and define what
the extent of Te Kahui Tupua is. So I don't think we're even
named currently in the bill. Uh, there's a reference there to Te
Urwera, which is one of the other legal personalities,
over a natural feature. And so that definition
really, contains and
seems to restrict, what our settlement
legislation actually provides for Te Kahui Tupua and
us as the representative face and, voice
entity. So I guess it's, it's with that that our,
I guess our submissions are really, are based around the
fact that these bills aim to
or-- they, they seem to restrict,
what we already have in our settlement legislation.
So I'm gonna hand now to Sean, who's gonna talk through, really just
highlight for you some of those technical issues, and then, and then I'll close us
off at the end. So kia ora, Sean.
Tena tatou. Uh, yeah, as Leanne has referred to
the, I guess, the reference to Te Kahui Tupua is relatively
clumsy in the bills at the moment. It, it's shoehorned in to identify Maori
land, and then the provisions of both bills that hang from that
definition, dramatically
constrain and I guess look to redefine what Te
Kahui Tupua is, which, which rubs up against,
Te Tiriti o Kupe Takirauano and, and the legislation that implements
that. Um, that has quite a significant practical effect for
Te Kahui Tupua, both in terms of how
it, can implement its standing in resource management matters,
and then secondly, how, how difficult it,
how difficult it will be to implement some of those within the transition
time frames that are, that are set in the legislation.
There's a real challenge of, trying to renegotiate
or re- recast some of these
arra- some of the settlement arrangements or the arrangements for Te Kahui
Tupua in a two-year window concurrent to national planning
frameworks, regional spatial plans, local area
plans all starting to, to, to be developed and hit the
road. And for a legal person such as Te Kahui Tupua,
which sits broadly across the Taranaki region, that, that's quite a
fundamental and substantial impact that, that as, as
Leanne has mentioned, starts to rub up against what the, what Te Tiriti o
Kupe Takirauano, sets out. Um,
the, the, the redress and, and Te Kahui Tupua have a
set of values, Ngā Pu Vakatupua, and Te Kahui Tupua status,
which, which, to be, have,
have, the ability to be considered
and, and influence any activity that may impact on Te Kahui
Tupua. So I think the-- I guess the rub is
pretty, pretty evident in that when the scope of
planning, plan making, the scope of any resource
consent or equivalent type, processes is, is narrowed
dramatically,
even more so when it's shoehorned into the definition of identified
Maori land. Um, look, turning, turning
to, I guess, the plan making processes that, that sit in both
bills, there's no standing
for Te Kahui Tupua. Um, it's another
discretionary interest to be weighed.
It would need to submit alongside everybody else,
to, to, to, I guess, to provide that advice and provide that
input into any plan making, which starts to push up against
the, the, the express, provisions of the, the settlement
legislation fifty-three two. Um, so
look, in our submission, we've provided some, some drafting.
It's-- She's pretty fast drafting.
So I think that, it's more the,
it's more the principles and ideas than that drafting more so than, than
the wording specifically that we're wedded to.
But those really just seek to, insert into the
process the, the, the recognition of standing and the role of Ngāpu
Vakatupua and Te Kahui Tupua within, within, within the Taranaki
region. But I'll, I'll s- I'll stop there 'cause that's sort of
the fundamental issues. There's a range of other kind of bits that flow from
that and, and the intricacies of, of both bills, but, but the-- it
all starts from, I guess, the way this-- these bills are cast
and the way that they, um-
The way they understand Te Kāhui Tupua.
Right. So sections nine and ten of,
the Natural Environments Bill as it is are what we're referring
to as the equivalency, equivalency
bills, pa- provisions, sorry.
And so
what, what those do for us is say that while
there is a negotiation to be had between the pa- between the Crown
and treaty settlement partners, to determine how
best to recognize and uphold treaty settlements,
that to the greatest extent possible, that will
be, you know, the existing,
the existing arrangements will be,
applied. Uh, and certainly for that, that two-year
period that's prescribed. Our view is it took us nine
years to negotiate these arrangements, and I'm not hopeful
that a two-year, period in which to
resolve a number of, of issues is
appropriate. And we were one-- we were only one treaty,
treaty
redress, arr- set of arrangements.
I think the, the other point is greatest
extent possible gives us less than what we currently have
legislatively. And so there are things that will need to be
resolved. I don't believe that, two years will
be enough. And once that, I think it's nine three that
repeals the section after two years from a-
from, enforcement date,
we're sort of left in a, in a situation where the
Crown can't usu- can't unilaterally amend treaty
settlements without the agreement of the treaty partner.
Uh, and so we run ourselves into a
point where actually we're going to be kind of
deadlocked
potentially because we just don't have and haven't
had the time to work through what these arrangements mean going
forward. So I think we'll end it there so that we can, enable
questions from the committee. Tēnā koutou.
Thank you very much. Um, Huhana, I believe, has a question for
you.
Tēnā koe, Leana. O tira, tēnā koe, Shaun, mo
tō wāhi kōrero i tēnei ata. Um, wanting to
really talk with you around,
engagement and, just the way
that
our Kāhui Tupua has been treated,
in the preparation and drafting of this legislation.
We've heard that it's not even listed within
the bills. Um, was there any engagement from
Crown officials with you, in
preparation? And what was the quality of that engagement if
you were i- included in
conversations?
So no, no engagement specifically with Te Kāhui Tupua, with
Te Tupahi Kōkōrangi. Uh, in fairness, we
are relatively new
entity. Our, our settlement legislation went through at the beginning of last
year. Um, however, we've been in
negotiation for nine years, so, you know, I don't use
it. That's not an excuse for not knowing that these arrangements were,
were coming. So it's-- we've had none.
We've had no engagement, no input.
Uh, and, and
I believe that this has been done back to front.
I thought you would resolve, how treaty settlements
will move forward in the new planning space prior
to introducing bills that have holding clauses
essentially to say, "We're gonna give you two years
to renegotiate and re-agree every
treaty settlement that's, you know, occurred in the country." I, I
think that's unrealistic,
yeah, and, and, and unfair on the parties to have to do that in that
timeframe.
Mr. Chair, a supplementary on that one.
Yeah. Yeah, go on.
So, you know,
you, you, you are a known entity. Uh, y- the, the
settlement came through the house.
We were there and, provided speeches of support.
So you weren't included or even considered.
We, we see that in the legislation.
Uh, and yet, this approach was meant to be a new
way of environmental governance, of that mahi tahi,
in looking after, you know, the kāhui maunga as we have with the
Ngāhere and Niuerevera and Te Awatapua.
So,
i- in my mind, why should you need to
relitigate a treaty settlement that the ink has barely
dried, for this legislation? Because really
you're a whakauruho,
and, and what has been agreed should be upheld
by any government, in environmental reform.
Because really you're already providing the framework as to how the mahi tahi is
meant to occur. Is that correct?
Agree one hundred percent. Agree one hundred percent.
And, and in fact, you know, Taranaki Maunga and Te
Papakura o Taranaki, the national park,
provides all of the sustenance to our region.
It provides all of the you know, the water to our region.
Um, it's a key component to, to
how, environmental,
planning, you know, done in this region.
Taranaki Maunga is a key component, and at present,
Taranaki Maunga is excluded from having a role in helping
develop those.
Kia ora.
Yeah. Well, thank you very lot. We've reached our time.
So look, thank you very much for your, contribution this morning.
Really appreciate it. And, we'll, yeah, we'll-- and, yeah, have a great
day. So thank you. Kia ora.
Tēnā koutou. Ngā mihi.
Right, so we'll now bring up our next
submitter.
Next submitter, Ngā Hapū o Ngāti
Porou. Here we go. Kia ora.
Tena koe.
Good morning. Ah, yes. Ah, yes, we, we, we meet again.
Good morning. Kia ora. Uh, hi, Grant McCallum here.
Um, welcome to the, subcommittee, of the
Environment Select Committee this morning.
I'm chairing this one, and we've got-- you've got 15 minutes of our time.
Please take your submission as read, but you're welcome to highlight a few points,
and then we'll leave time for questions. It's all yours. Thank you.
Ka pai, tena tatou. I'll just check you can hear me okay.
Perfect. Thank you.
Excellent. Um, well, morning everybody.
Um, I appear for Ngā Rohe Moana o Ngāti Porou alongside my
whanaunga, Matanuku Mahuika, and Agnes Walker, who you can see on screen.
My name's Huriana Uenis Tope. I'm here in a legal capacity.
I'm gonna hand it over to Matanuku to start the submission this morning, and
then, he'll pass back over to me for some technical points, and
then we'll leave time for questions. So I'll hand over to you, Ma.
Tena koutou. Um, tena koe, e te hiamona,
and members of the committee. Um,
I'll be relatively quick. I'm, I'm here, I was the
legal advisor through the majority of this process through to
2015 when my father, who was the chief negotiator,
passed away,
and I became the, the negotiator at that point through to the passing
of the bespoke Ngāti Porou legislation in
2019. Um, the, the context
of this is that, this was a,
a bespoke agreement that, well, negotiations for
which began in the end of 2003, start of
2004, following, was then Labor
government's
announcing its intention to legislate to prevent, Māori
claiming customary title in relation to the foreshore and seabed.
Um, and the, the challenge for us through this negotiation was
balancing both the, the politics of the foreshore and
seabed, but, but
also the-- our view at the time, and it remains our
view, was that this was a national response, but it failed to take
into account our very specific circumstances.
Um, and we've discussed those circumstances previously.
By far the majority population living in the Tairāwhiti is Ngāti
Porou. Um, we've retained the vast
majority of our coastal lands. We maintain a very,
strong and ongoing connection to the, the taku tai.
We don't wanna keep the public out, but we do want to make sure that our
interests are protected. So the challenge that we had was: How do
we, how do we ensure that we,
are able to exert, a level of influence which is
commensurate with the strength of our connection,
but we do so in a, in a way which navigates around the various,
statutory instruments? A-and the context of the RMA, the RMA is different
in the marine environment,
and it's different because on dry land you can identify a
landowner. It deals with environmental impacts but doesn't allocate
resources. In the marine environment, it has an allocative ex-
effect. It allocates space. So it's necessary to interact
with that regime in order to, prevent it from
undermining, you know, the rights that we say that we
have and that were recognized through this agreement.
So the, the short point is that, you know, we worked our way through,
ensuring that we had effective
oversight and input, into the management of the taku
tai moana which, at the most extreme ends, where we have the strongest interests,
we can prevent an activity from occurring, accepting
ongoing public access, and also accepting certain things of national
significance. So it was a very carefully crafted
compromise. An amendment to the RMA as being proposed
will affect that compromise
a-and will effectively be a, you know, a
repositioning of us a-and will require
a ne- a renegotiation of this agreement.
Um, I, I won't take up any, any further time and will perhaps pass it over
to Huriana.
Good, and so
just reinforcing the kōrero that you heard from the previous
submitter, this is a similar situation and
also different. So similar in the sense that, the management
arrangements under the bespoke Ngā Hapū o Ngāti Porou,
Deed and Act provides the
management arrangements with specific legal standing to participate in
particular processes that are currently provided for under the RMA.
And as Matanuku's indicated, that occurs across the spectrum.
So depending on the rights that are recognized, that
will, lend itself to a more greater role for
Ngā Rohe Moana o Ngāti Porou and Ngā Hapū o Ngāti Porou in those
processes. And so what is happening here is with the reframing
and shifting of the system and, in some instances, changing
completely, that changes the nature of then
how Ngā Hapū can participate in that system.
So what we've tried to do in the submission is be really specific about
that. So, I didn't wanna reiterate points that,
that Ngā Hapū's support of the submission you heard yesterday from
Tirunanga Nui o Ngāti Porou, because there's been a lot of collaboration in this
space across Ngāti Porou entities.
But at paragraph 30 of our submission, that's where we're really getting into
some of kind of what I would say is the nitty-gritty of the, the effects
on the arrangements themselves and really highlighting also that,
these arrangements are specifically named in the bills, and
they are not treaty settlements. And so getting that also
through to, officials who we have been engaging with,
can sometimes be a challenge because understanding that difference and
therefore the unique lens that you have to apply when you're
understanding these arrangements.
Look, we-- you know, it can be challenging, but that is the task, that is the
obligation on all of us to understand these arrangements that the
Crown has entered into and said that they will uphold.
Um, and we're up for that. Um, it's just how you do that.
And at the moment, our position is that the bills do not
uphold the arrangements, and we've got real concerns about how,
the specific-Mechanisms within the act are going to be
eroded through this process. So I did want to leave time for questions, but
also just signaling that, if you are looking for, okay, what
is the rub, part of it's just contained in paragraph
30 there. So, happy to take questions.
May, may I say one more thing, Horiana?
Yeah, ka ako ma.
Um, I, I think the way to, to look at this is, is that the
outcome that the different mechanisms produce rather than the statutory framework
through which,
they, they would operate, 'cause we're very much focused on the outcome.
If you think about the, the, you know,
the s- the, the sort of like the statutory acknowledgement, that, that is
around the ability for us to know what's happening in that Takutai
Moana. The environmental covenant is ensuring that our values are taken
into account when people are making decisions in relation to the Takutai
Moana. The permission right is about saying where we have
title, there are certain things that we need to agree to
because of the nature of the interference, with our entry.
So, so think about it in those terms rather than the statutory regime
itself. The statutory regime was just the regime that existed, and so
therefore that was how it gave it expression.
But we were, we were really thinking about it in terms of what is the right that
it gives to participate, and the RMA was simply the vehicle that
existed at the time to enable that.
And all we're looking to do here is maintain the status quo.
We're not trying to get any preference or any special deal out of it.
We just wanna make sure that we're unaffected.
Thank you. Great. Thank you. So happy to take questions
now? Excellent. Righto. Um, okay.
Huhana I believe has a question. Thank you.
All right. Uh, tēnā koutou nga hapu o Ngati Porou.
O te rai te whaea Agnes. Um, koutou ko Mata Nuku, ko
Horiana, e mihi nui ana ki a koutou.
Loud and clear e tatou ma. Loud and clear.
Pera i te kāhui maunga, ko koutou anō tērā.
Um, from West Coast to East Coast, we are hearing clear, consistent messages
of kahore, and want to acknowledge, the work that you
have undertaken over many years, to achieve these
arrangements. And similar to what I asked of
our Taranaki whanaunga, do you believe that the arrangements that you
have are like a korowai or a whakaruruhau or that safety
blanket for the environment, for the people, for the lands and
sea, for Ngā Hapu o Ngāti Porou and the wider
community? And, you know, you need to see these
arrangements upheld and honored without being
relitigated via
legislation.
I was waiting for Agnes to see if she would say something, but,
um- Uh, look, I mean, we, you could, you
could describe it that way. Uh, I mean, these arrangements are about,
um... I think of what one of our uncles,
the late Eru Paenga, said shortly after the announcement
was made, and his comment was, "You know, I've been alive
70-something years," it was at that time, "and this whole time I thought
this piece of coast was mine, and now I'm being told that it
isn't." So the, the, the, the objective was
always to maintain that, that connection in an enduring
way. But I need to be really clear, like we accepted right
away public access, public use navigation.
We, we, we-- this is not intended to be something which is, which is
exclusionary. This is very much about trying to
protect, but, but also recognizing, you know,
manaaki is a way you can describe it, that, that, you know, we, we
exist in a, in a place where everybody has a, has a, a, a wish to, to go to the
coast. And, you know, we don't wish to exclude them, but we do want
to ensure that that connection is maintained, and so these agreements are all about
that.
Thank you. And just one more, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. One second, then I'm going to Rachel. Thank you.
Yes.
Thank you.
Um, I reflect on the Auditor-General's recent report to the Māori
Affairs Select Committee that examined, compliance or
the way that, the Crown and its entities uphold,
or even plan how they're going to support giving effect to
treaty settlements and arrangements such as this.
Um, again, maybe we're not learning fast enough as
kāwanatanga as to how to honor these arrangements, and it's more of a
mihi and a thank you for you coming before us.
So I'll pass the time over to Rachel. Kia rohanamae engari e mihi nui ana.
Yeah. Uh, Rachel Brooking has a question.
Yeah.
Over to you, Rachel.
Thank you. And, and hello again. Um,
we-- you, you talk about, hapū and iwi
involvement in national direction setting and the importance
of that. Um, can you describe to us what's
changing and how you think would, what would be the best,
possible way for, and most appropriate way for
involvement?
Do you want me to take that one, Matt?
Yes, absolutely.
Um, yes, sure. And look, this is something that I think
has been causing a lot of angst, particularly in our
rohe. Um, and I'll only speak for, for, Ngā Hapu o
Ngāti Porou and obviously Te Runanga Nui o Ngāti Porou.
But I mean, Te Tai Rawhiti and the submission is framed in the
reality that, you know, our whanaunga live in up the
coast, which is one that has, you know, received a lot of
national attention lately. But that is the daily reality of our whanaunga that live
in places like Te Araroa, Hicks Bay, Tokomaru Bay.
Um, and so what we see as part of the impact of more
centralization into national direction setting and limiting the
ability, for councils to, to really give effect to
bespoke arrangements is that we are further away
from having a, an impact on and,
input into what is affecting our daily reality.
And so what that looks like for Ngāti Porou, and you heard it yesterday as well
from Te Runanga Nui, is there is the ability to create bespoke arrangements
here, and that is not to run up against what-We think
and accept, appropriate national direction mechanisms.
That's not to say we're against national direction, not at all.
Um, but there needs to be the ability to develop bespoke arrangements within
those considerations. And so that is, probably highlighted
more in the Runanga Nuie submission, but also raised in the Ngā Hapu
submission. What does that actually look like?
That means that we are engaging with those processes early, and it
also means that we are given the opportunity to say, "Hey, actually,
in Te Tairāwhiti, as the country can see, things are not
working, and so we need to be able to design and work
with the Crown, to design processes that are going to
ensure that people can live their best lives up
there. Um, and those of us who live outside of the rohe that want to move
back can do that, in our, in our lifetime." So I think
that requires, some more work and some more thinking about what
bespoke arrangements can be, provided for in areas
like Te Tairāwhiti.
Mm. And, and we have a very good relationship,
across the different groups within the
Tairāwhiti. We have our moments like all families do.
Uh, but, but, but we also have particularly
recently a history of, of quite good collaboration where we need
to. That, that becomes more challenging when
you, when you centralise and you move away.
Um, as Horiana says, we can't speak for anybody else, but we can speak to our own
experience, and that's what it's
been.
Unmute myself is always helpful. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission.
We've reached our time, a lot of time this morning.
Um, I really appreciate yours and, please have a great day.
Cheers.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
All right. Tena tātou.
Right. We'll now move on to our next submitter, who I believe
is Tasman District Council.
Welcome back, Clark. I see you there.
Here we go.
Tasman District Council, here we go.
Morning team. Um, Grant McKelley, I'm chairing the select committee this morning,
the subcommittee. Uh, we've got fifteen minutes with your, of your
time. Uh, we've got-- Take your, please take your submissions read.
Feel free to highlight a few points, but love it if you can leave, some time
for questions. It's all up to you. Cheers.
Good as gold. Uh, thanks very much for the opportunity to speak.
Um, so I'm Tim King, the Mayor of Tasman.
Uh, this is Barry Johnson, so our, Manager of,
Planning. So, yep, highlights,
that generally we're supportive of the, I guess, the intent of the
legislation around simplifying, around streamlining, around making more cost
effective. Um, our concern is a-around some of the details and
whether or not they actually enable that outcome, or whether
potentially, they may work in slight somewhat contrary
fashion. I've got a few points to make and then, hopefully there'll be time for
questions. Our first point is, as a unitary authority, we're concerned
that there's a bit of a misalignment between the two bills, and for us, that
potentially dismantles the integration we currently have, which is kind
of contradictory to the local government reform objectives that are being,
discussed around the country. Uh, and also prevents
us bundling consents in a way that applicants can have one
process that covers, all their consent requirements for any
particular project or outcome. So that's a really key
concern for us, and we think that potentially for unitary authorities, that means
it's a step backwards from what is already a fairly well integrated
system and process, to something not quite so.
Um, we have concerns about capability and capacity right
across, the sector, and that starts at central government with
MFE, all the way through the system, regional
TAs. You know, just the, the, the number of skilled
people
across the system that are gonna be needed to implement, the
legislation. Uh, so that remains a big issue for us in terms of
both cost and complexity, and the financial risk of trying to compete for
resources in order to play our part.
We're concerned about the timeframe, particularly the potential
for us to be out consulting, and particularly with spatial planning,
prior to seeing national direction and limit setting.
Uh, and again, the risk that that provides while we're
consulting with our community over our part of the process
without knowing the certainty that comes through that national direction,
and limit setting.
We have concerns around some of the concepts which are,
I guess vague by definition. Um, so regulatory
relief, and we'll touch more on this in a minute, and reasonable
use. Terms that
seem likely to generate quite a bit of, potential
legal, action over time as we try and
sort out what they actually mean in terms of case law, because they're not
particularly specific. Uh, while I guess most people will have a view of
what reasonable use is, it probably varies quite a lot
between, people with different views on whatever the,
subject of that particular process
is. We think that, the
regu- on the regulatory relief, there's a, a potential missed
opportunity to create a much more positive conversation about how
landowners may be in effect recognized for
the contribution they make to public outcomes.
Um, we already, and many councils I believe, do have a system
of, rates relief around QEII covenanting.
And, and our kind of view is perhaps if we can swap the conversation
from being a council puts in some form of rule or restriction, and then there's
some form of contest between the landowner and the council over what that
means and what compensation should be provided.
If we flip it around and say, "Well, we'll identify some key values," and
they might be biodiversity, might be natural landscape, they might be a range of
things. If landowners use some form of voluntary
protection that is in perpetuity, it could be two-- QEII
covenant, but it wouldn't necessarily have to be, as long as it's enduring and
legal, um-Then the council could
consider their existing rates relief mechanisms to
provide that recognition. And that, in our view, creates a
positive conversation where landowners are taking...
And many of these, values only exist because
landowners have protected them for the last 100, 150 years.
Um, and it's not uncommon in our region to have
landowners put significant chunks of their property into Q2 covenants, and then
that's recognized via our rates rel- existing rates relief mechanism,
which does two things. It means we're not spending a staggering amount of money
on, the process of putting in protection.
It's a positive and constructive conversation with landowners, not a kinda
contestable negative legal one. Uh, and hopefully it still delivers
the outcome that, I guess, everybody's looking for, which is protecting those core
environmental values.
The last point we'd like to make is around collaboration, with our neighbors,
Nelson City Council, and I understand there's a submission from Nelson City,
around and requiring a compulsory working
together, for spatial planning.
We're certainly open to the idea of working, collectively.
We've done two, future development strategies
collectively, under the Local Government Act, obviously not through
the RMA or its replacement. But we're, we're not,
convinced that making that mandatory is the right thing to do.
We also are unclear exactly what working collaboratively means
under the legislation. Does it result in a collaborative process that still ends up
with two separate plans across regions or more than
two if there's multiple regions collaborating, or does it result in one
single plan? Um, so yeah, like I say, we've had
constructive, conversations with Nelson City.
We're positively inclined towards walking with-- working with them on spatial
planning specifically, but we don't believe it needs to be made
mandatory. So in terms of recommendations, time frames just need
consideration around the link between national direction and,
national direction and limit setting alongside our planning
processes, providing the ability to, a
wider range of, relief, for landowners or property owners
around regulations impacts, hopefully a more positive and constructive
one. Provide more explicit, explicit fees, charges, and cost
recovery precisions, provisions,
including single well-defined treaty clauses.
Combine the bills into one piece of legislation and retain the option to have
a joint regional spatial plan, but not make it
mandatory. Open for
questions.
Yeah. Good morn- great. Thank you.
Well, the first question we'll have up, Rachel. Thank you.
Thank, thanks, thanks, Tim, for that.
Um, really good points you're making there.
Uh, I'm just interested in this last comment about not being mandatory to have to
work-
Mm-hmm
... with Nelson on the plans we had.
Your, your f- neighbor, Nick
Smith, say that he, he thinks it should be,
combined, but he was very careful not to speak on Tasman's behalf.
You'll be pleased to hear
very sensibly. Um, so I'm just wondering why, why it wouldn't be mandatory
when that's happening around the rest of the country, and, you know,
people live and work in
across the two districts.
Yeah. So I mean, our, our, our kind of view is twofold.
One is, making it mandatory. We've been through two FDS,
as I said. Uh, we were concerned that quite a lot of the workload ended up
falling on us. Uh, and if it's made mandatory, there's kinda no option.
You just have... Like, you kinda fall into the thing, you have to do it.
If there's a conversation about it, that means we can...
And I've had this conversation with my neighboring mayor about ensuring that the
costs are split evenly, the staff contribution is split evenly, et cetera.
Um, and also whether it's spatial planning, spatial
planning is relatively straightforward, like I say.
But the FDS, we've done it collectively.
We're one urban area on the MPS, urban development
anyway. But when you come to the next lot of
plans, then we're very different regions.
They're a small, you know, small city, we're a vast rural area.
And so our concern was also that if it involves both steps of
planning, it may well be that we do spatial planning
collectively, but actually the subsequent plans around environment and land
use may be done separately. So we just wanna understand what
the, the process is and still have the choice to go into
it. Like I say, I, I personally think it's the right thing to do.
I'm just not convinced it needs to be mandatory in the legislation.
Okay. Because it would be for other areas, you know, like Otago, for instance, is
very... Queenstown's very different from Dunedin.
Yeah.
Um, but, but the cost thing, if the, if the
legislation was clear around costs, would that make a difference to your,
to your thoughts around it being mandatory or not?
Yeah. I mean, if it specifies that it has to be the, the way the cost is shared
is fifty-fifty or thirty-third, thirty-three, thirty-three if it's three
or whatever, yeah, that, that helps.
But it's not just the cost, it's the actual...
The burden of a large rural area trying to do the consultation, do all the work,
actually, by definition, is different. So.
Okay. Okay, great. Thank you. Thanks for that, Tim.
Uh, Lan.
Tena koutou, thanks for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your very clear
comments that there doesn't actually seem to be anything in the
bill that actually, for example, maintains water
quality where it might be significantly,
of a better quality
than the environmental limits actually set.
What are the risks for Tasman? Like, is this a race to the bottom?
W-what-- Why did you point that out?
Yeah. Well, I think we are in a position where our existing water
quality is very high, by na-national comparisons.
Us and the West Coast are probably two areas with really high water
quality. So,
um-The, the risk is
that if the limit is set below that,
then there is the possibility, remote though it is likely to
be, given we have good water quality because it's been
maintained through all sorts of different, resource management
legislation over time. Um, the risk is there's the opportunity for
that to be degraded through some form of, action,
consent process, et cetera. So, I mean, we're just highlighting the
fact that maintaining water quality where it's already really good is,
for us, really important. Um,
and you don't wanna-
Thank you
... pervert the outcome baked into the legislation.
Thank you. And can I ask another question, Chair?
Yeah, yeah, fire away. Yep.
Thank you. Um, the other aspect that I wanted to ask about was
what seems like this very high bar when you
are actually setting, your
regional plans, and that's where you can't
actually use regul- regulatory
rules, unless the council is satisfied that
voluntary measures, for example, will meet
the, essentially the actions that you're trying to achieve in
your action plan. H- how does Tasman perceive that?
Like, are you gonna be able to do this sort of big
assessment, and m- mean, that means you're
satisfied that the voluntary measures won't meet the
action plans, and then you could put in regulatory rules?
Can you help step us through what that would look like for you?
I mean, I guess this cuts across the conversation that we had and the point we made
around regulatory relief, is ultimately the best outcome
and the most cost-efficient outcome is that people do the things
we want them to do without rules and regulations.
That's the ideal outcome. And in my experience,
probably 85-plus percent of people do do the right
thing, and the regulatory kind of, thing is there to capture the
people who, for whatever reason, you know, choose not to, to do things
the right way. So look, I would like to think that if the legislation's
clear enough and the tools are available, for
councils to satisfy themselves that, certain things can be
achieved voluntarily,
that, you know, we don't need to have as heavy
regulatory, role as perhaps we have had
in the past. But at the end of the day,
I, I, I certainly firmly believe in our council's position is we've had a
massive emphasis on working voluntarily, working with landowners.
Probably our best example is our dairy, shed compliance
program, where, yes, there are background rules and regulations,
but the education, information sharing, and working with communities
has actually provided us much better outcomes at much less
cost.
Uh, and I'll have a follow-up question there actually.
Just on the regulatory relief, 'cause I suppose where the, issue arises is
where you get a situation whereby, the
council, imposes a, a mand- a, ex-
outstanding natural, outstanding natural landscape-
Yeah
... or SNA rules, et cetera, right?
Yeah.
And the landowner feels that actually that's gonna sim- significantly
impact
on the value of their property/ability to earn an income.
Yeah.
It's c- it's very easy. I, I, I applaud your approach, by the way.
Um, it's very easy for, councils or
whoever to say, "Well, this is what we want," but they don't carry the cost.
Yeah.
Whereas if there's a cost involved, they'll actually say, "Is this important to the
wider community?" It's so important that they're prepared to help pay for it.
That's the question. What's your thoughts?
I'm not disagreeing with that. I actually think we just need to flip the
conversation. Like, if you look all around the world, there are a vast number of
countries where having some form of protection over your land is seen as an
increase in value. You go to the UK to try and buy inside a national park or an
area of outstanding natural beauty, you will pay a premium to live there because of
the protection. We've never managed to get our country to that space 'cause
we do always see it as a negative and a negative impact.
And I just think if we can flip that whole conversation and landowners go,
"Actually, there's a financial upside in terms of potentially rates relief
or some other form of relief, and my property value is seen as more
valuable protected than not," then
we all spend less money on legislation,
regulation, rules, policies, and plans
because actually
landowners aren't contesting the need to protect.
They're actually going, "Actually, we can see it, and it's in our own
hands. We've been given the opportunity to protect it."
Council or government's role might be to identify the values and then
say, "Here's a pathway for protection.
It's in your hands. You can do it through this mechanism." QE2 is an
example.
Yeah.
Um, and then there is some relief. The backstop would
be, if you don't do any of those things and you just say, "Actually, we don't wanna
protect it at all," then there's always the regulatory backstop.
But that should be the last cab off the rank, not the first, which is what it seems
to be the- currently.
Yeah. Uh, point taken. Thank you. Look, unfortunately, we've met time, but thanks
for your presentation this morning, team. Really appreciate it.
You've made some great points, and, have a great day. Cheers.
Cheers. Thank you very much for the opportunity.
Cheers.
Right. Our next submitter should be Spark.
Whoops.
One New Zealand or group of... Who have we got here?
Um, good morning. Um, so you've got Graeme McCarrison from
Spark.
Yes.
And joining me is Fiona Matthews,
from Connexa-
Yeah
... who, build our pole networks, and then Ross
Langford, who represents Forty South and One New
Zealand.
Okay. Look, good morning, I'm Grant McCallum, the chair of the subcommittee.
Um, you've got 15 minutes of our time.
Uh, we please take your submissions as read, but feel free to
highlight a few points, and, we'll... And please leave some time for questions.
Fire away. Thank you
Absolutely. Um, and we were listening in on the TCF
submission yesterday, so probably-
Yeah
... got some further detail that we'll add into this, this morning,
so. So massive thank you for everyone who's working on the
bills. Um,
yeah, it's, it's a huge effort and I know there's lots of work going on-
Yeah
... in the background at the moment.
But, we represent critical networks that
traverse New Zealand, connecting us, all of
us, and internationally through our submarine
cables. We depend on effective national
direction. Currently, that's the National Environmental
Standard, 2016, which is in the process of
getting amended. And then inconsistent
provisions for telecommunications within
regional and district plans that make up the
shortcomings of the existing national
direction. So, detailed submission and
edits are on page, start on page 10 of our
submission. They're, kind of, highlighted.
We're very telco infrastructure focused.
Um-
Yep
... so just stuck to our knitting, basically.
Um, so for us, the first
national instruments are critical.
Um, and so we've asked for, for us to
be involved as experts because we know the networks to
work aside other key stakeholders, and that's local
government, environmental groups, MFA, so
forth. Uh, we suggest that the
timeframe for developing the instruments, particularly the
standards, needs to be extended. We're fully
aware of our NES amendments are 18
months and we still don't know what they're gonna look like.
That's close, we hope before June.
But it's just a good example. And then we also
don't believe that dropping the existing RMA
directions into the new framework is going to work, and
so there's gonna need to be, hence, involvement of us and
time to do that. And so as I said before,
if for infrastructure telecommunications, we're looking
to be comprehensively managed at, under national
policy and national standards, and not have to
rely on bespoke provisions in the 17 combined
plans, which then expands out into
67 land use plans. We just don't have the
capacity or time to be simultaneously
involved in the natural
environment plans, land use plans, which are gonna be all
notified by the end of, 2029
at the moment. Our other one is,
permitted activities. We, and this has
been well traversed, but
yeah, we request the mandatory requirement for registration to
be removed, or at least for the first
national direction standards for infrastructure to guide where
registrations are necessary. And I
suppose the example for us is that
we undertake maintenance or upgrade our
sites or build new sites primarily as permitted
activities at the moment. So if someone phones
up with a complaint about,
a network issue or noise or something, at the
moment, we're able to dispatch a technician out there to fix the
problem very quickly. Or our program
of replacing antennas and upgrading
network, these are all done under permitted activities.
So at the moment, we're worried about if we're having to
get thousands of consents just to work on our
network, what that means for the public.
Feels like a regulatory overreach for which
we don't understand the problem, 'cause we don't generate
compliance issues currently. But what it will do
is generate a significant cost and delay to us
being able to work on our networks and keep people
connected. So we don't see the benefit, we just see it as a
huge cost. Could be tens of millions of dollars of
delay, and I suspect there's other groups like that.
Farmers probably, worrying about whether they can plow their fields
anymore. Um, so there's that. Uh, we're
also
aware that the infrastructure goal needs to be
slightly tweaked to basically strengthen it to
balance it against the other, goals within both
bills. And then having a comprehensive
infrastructure definition would be useful.
And the other issue for us is we have a significant number of
designations that are a mixture of buildings,
exchanges, but cell sites also, often in sensitive
areas.
And so we've highlighted a number of changes.
There's, some ambiguity between
which rule trumps which, designation versus
national standards. It's an issue under the RMA that no one's
wanted to fix, so we've just, we've recommended a
fix. The strategic need test feels
onerous, where you have to have network in a particular
location. And then just clarification around
construction plans. And we've suggested a third
party, rule to enable, like for us, for
co-location. So if, for example, for us, Two
Degrees isn't a requiring authority, but if they wanted to go
on a Spark pole, Connexa pole, and it was within the
designation, then that should be enabled
without, having to go through that.
So it's kind of that intent. So open for
questions
Thank you. I'll, I'll, I'll just kick it off. On that last point, I'm just...
Can you clarify, you're saying, explain to me
the, the, the ch- the challenges around, dual
use.
Yep.
I, I, I mean, that just, I mean to me it makes common sense from everyone's
perspective. What's the issue there?
I'm wondering-
So, yeah, so at the moment a designation, the
be- the party, so for Spark, let's say, and Connect, so that
owns the pole,
we can build and upgrade on that
pole.
Yep.
But-
For Spark only
... for Spark only. So the designation rules only apply
to that, and we've identified a number of
times where it would be beneficial to have, like,
one or two degrees or both of them on that strategic
pole. 'Cause often they are in an outstanding natural
landscape somewhere-
So you want one pole
... it's difficult. Yeah, one pole, make it easy.
It's for the same purpose.
The, the, the, so the designations in the historic sometimes don't allow
that?
They don't at all allow that currently or under the new
legislation.
Really?
Yeah. It's an issue that's just-
Madness
... it's probably, yeah. It's
yeah. We'd love to talk that one through.
Well, we'll, we'll highlight that and we will see what we can do about it.
It's a, it makes a, makes a lot of common sense, 'cause it means my s- cellphone
won't drop out every time I drive around Northland. Thank you.
Yeah. That would help. That would help.
Right. Uh, Rachel Brooking has a question.
Yeah. Also, also related to designations, I don't know if you can recall, Graham,
but, have you looked at the pr- provisions that were in
the Natural and Built Environment Act compared
with this and also with the RMA? Did, did that
draft... 'Cause I think the drafting's different between the two.
W- was it better or worse, or-
It was, it was better. I just can't remember
which bits were better. But generally it was better.
Um-
No, that, that, that's helpful.
Yep.
We can ask officials about that.
Okay, and, another question, infrastructure, the definition of
infrastructure. Do you feel that, what...
How would you like that e- expanded to include and, and impact more with
you, reflect more your role as, a key part of-
Yeah. Um, so under the Resource Management Act,
there is a definition of infrastructure.
In the new bills,
infrastructure, the main infrastructure
definition is in two place, three
places. Designations, so one of the schedules, so it's
not actually in the interpretation section, and
it kind of feels like its importance is diminished
because, parties, infrastructure and
other parties, won't think to look in the designation section for a
definition of what infrastructure is.
Um, the new national inf-
national stan- direction of infrastructure
has a definition and it, it just feels like
dropping that in would be a, a useful
thing. It also would enable maybe the tidying up of the
multiple definitions in the legis- bills
just to be one, basically. It's, quite a comprehensive
definition. So just, yeah.
Okay. Cool. Uh, well, it doesn't appear that... Any other questions?
Anyone got any questions? I think you've, made your case very well.
Thank you.
Thank you. Highlighted a couple of key points, which we'll take up with
officials.
Great.
So thank you very much for your time this morning, really appreciate it.
We've got your-
Yeah
... submission here.
Yep.
Um, and, yep, have a great day. Thank you.
You too. Thank you.
Yes. Okay, bye. Right, team, well, according to my list,
team, we have a break. And that is now for 20 minutes.
We start again at 10 o'clock. Okay?
Have I got that right? Yes. Yes. We've got Gisborne District
Council at 10 o'clock. See you then. Okay.